[WIP] Migration guide for providers to implement V2 primitives (#2496)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/migration-guides/external-providers-primitives-v2.mdx

---
title: Migrate provider interfaces from backend.run to primitives
description: Migrate to the primitives interface in external providers

---

> # Migrate provider interfaces from backend.run to primitives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Migrate provider interfaces from `backend.run` to primitives
```

## Motivation and context

The evolution of quantum algorithms and scaling of quantum processing units (QPUs) motivated the
introduction of the Qiskit [primitives interface](/guides/primitives) to provide a higher-level abstraction for
accessing QPUs. This interface is optimized for two core tasks in quantum algorithm development: expectation value estimation (Estimator) and
circuit sampling (Sampler).

> After a time of co-existence of the `backend.run` model and primitives model, where the primitives

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a time of co-existence of the `backend.run` model and primitives model, when the primitives
```
(If I understand correctly, once the primitives evolved to V2, backend.run was deprecated - is that what this is saying?)

evolved to the updated V2 primitives, the `backend.run` model was finally deprecated in favor of
these newer interfaces to streamline quantum workload execution.

> The existing collection of migration guides helps users [transition to the runtime provider](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime) and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The existing collection of migration guides helps users [transition to the Qiskit Runtime provider](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime) and
```

[update their user code to the V2 primitives interface](/migration-guides/v2-primitives) in time for the upcoming removal of `backend.run`.
To complement that, this guide supports external providers (both existing and upcoming)
in implementing their own version of the primitives V2 interface (Estimator or Sampler) that integrates seamlessly into the
standard Qiskit workflow.

These implementations can be used to wrap any custom provider hardware access function

> (for example: `execute_workload(QPU)` or `resource.access()`), or local simulator,
> as long as the final inputs and outputs conform to the established standards from the primitive interfaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(for example: `execute_workload(QPU)` or `resource.access()`) or local simulator,
as long as the final inputs and outputs conform to the established standards set by the primitive interfaces.
```

## If your provider already implemented `backend.run`

The Qiskit SDK offers wrappers for `backend.run` that can be easily adapted to a custom primitives workflow
through subclassing; these are the [`BackendEstimatorV2`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimatorV2) and [`BackendSamplerV2`.](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BackendSamplerV2) The inputs
to the primitives should follow the Primitive Unified Bloc (PUB) syntax specified in the V2 primitives interface. See the [Overview of PUBs section](/guides/primitive-input-output#pubs) in the Primitive inputs and outputs guide for details.

An advantage of this strategy is that the wrapper can handle the input and output manipulation, so knowledge of the PUB data

> model is not required. However, this might result in a sub-optimal runtime, which could be refined through a fully

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
model is not required. However, this might result in a suboptimal runtime, which could be refined through a fully
```

custom primitives implementation.

> The snippets below show how to create a custom Estimator instance following the strategy described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following snippets show how to create a custom Estimator instance following the strategy described above.
```

> The process would be analogous for a custom Sampler, modifying the base class to `BackendSamplerV2`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process is analogous for a custom Sampler, modifying the base class to `BackendSamplerV2`.
```

``` python
from qiskit.primitives import BackendEstimatorV2

class CustomEstimator(BackendEstimatorV2):
    """Estimator primitive for custom provider."""

>     _backend: CustomProviderResource

Author: This line is overwriting the type of the `self._backend` attribute to a custom type, because `BackendEstimatorV2` is written to only accept IBM types. It's a bit of a technicality, Python doesn't enforce these types so the code would run without it, but it feels a bit hacky not to add it. Let me come up with a comment to clarify this.

>     _backend: CustomProviderResource

Author: Added in [d1a12e8](https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2496/commits/d1a12e80cc756f9fb65e11ea81de83bb41b3f36a)

    def __init__(
        self,
        backend: CustomProviderResource,
        options: dict | None = None,
        extra_flag_used_in_estimation: bool = True,
        another_extra_flag: bool = False,
    ) -> None:
        """
        Args:
            backend: custom provider resource to evaluate circuits on.
            options: options passed to through to the underlying BackendEstimatorV2.
            extra_flag_used_in_estimation:  if `False`, do this.
            another_extra_flag: if `True`, do that,
        """

        # preprocess arguments if necessary according to custom flags
        processed_backend = ...
        processed_options = ...

        super().__init__(
            processed_backend,
            options=processed_options,
        )

    @property
    def backend(self) -> CustomProviderResource:
        """Computing resource used for circuit evaluation."""
        return self._backend
```

## If your provider didn't implement `backend.run` or you prefer a fully custom implementation

If a new provider is developed that doesn't conform to the legacy `backend.run` interface, the pre-packaged

> wrapper might not be the optimal route for implementing the primtives. Instead, you should implement a particular

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wrapper might not be the optimal route for implementing the primitives. Instead, you should implement a particular
```

        circuit, qargs, meas_info = _preprocess_circuit(pub.circuit)
        bound_circuits = pub.parameter_values.bind_all(circuit)
        arrays = {
            item.creg_name: np.zeros(
                bound_circuits.shape + (pub.shots, item.num_bytes), dtype=np.uint8
            )
            for item in meas_info
        }
        for index, bound_circuit in enumerate(bound_circuits):

            # ACCESS PROVIDER RESOURCE HERE
            # in this case, we are showing an illustrative implementation
            samples_array = ProviderResource.sample(bound_circuit)

            # post-processing of the sampling output to fit the required format
            for item in meas_info:
                ary = _samples_to_packed_array(samples_array, item.num_bits, item.qreg_indices)
                arrays[item.creg_name][index] = ary

        meas = {
            item.creg_name: BitArray(arrays[item.creg_name], item.num_bits) for item in meas_info
        }
        return SamplerPubResult(
            DataBin(**meas, shape=pub.shape),
            metadata={"shots": pub.shots, "circuit_metadata": pub.circuit.metadata},
        )
```

> The mechanics to implement a custom Estimator are analogous to the Sampler, but might require a different pre or post-processing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The mechanics to implement a custom Estimator are analogous to those for the Sampler, but might require a different pre- or post-processing
```

---
title: Migrate provider interfaces from backend.run to primitives
description: Migrate to the primitives interface in external providers

---

# Migrate provider interfaces from `backend.run` to primitives

## Motivation and context

The evolution of quantum algorithms and scaling of quantum processing units (QPUs) motivated the
introduction of the Qiskit [primitives interface](/guides/primitives) to provide a higher-level abstraction for
accessing QPUs. This interface is optimized for two core tasks in quantum algorithm development: expectation value estimation (Estimator) and
circuit sampling (Sampler).

After a time of co-existence of the `backend.run` model and primitives model, when the primitives
evolved to the updated V2 primitives, the `backend.run` model was finally deprecated in favor of

> these newer interfaces to streamline quantum workload execution.

Reviewer 3: `backend.run` is not actually deprecated in Qiskit, so we will need to find ways to encourage third party provider to adopt the primitives interface. 

I was thinking something like
> For backward compatibility, the `backend.run` interface continues to exist in Qiskit. However, it is deprecated in Qiskit Runtime, as most of the IBM Quantum users have migrated to primitives due to their improved usability and efficiency. 
> 
> This migration guide aims to help service providers to migrate from the `backend.run` interface to primitives, so their users can also benefits from the improvements.

Author: I wasn't sure what level of detail we wanted to share, so I kept it vague to the point where yes, you could infer backend.run is deprecated in Qiskit (I know it's not). I'll apply your suggestion :)

The existing collection of migration guides helps users [transition to the Qiskit Runtime provider](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime) and
[update their user code to the V2 primitives interface](/migration-guides/v2-primitives) in time for the upcoming removal of `backend.run`.
To complement that, this guide supports external providers (both existing and upcoming)
in implementing their own version of the primitives V2 interface (Estimator or Sampler) that integrates seamlessly into the

> standard Qiskit workflow.

Reviewer 3: I'd put the links to the migration guides in its own section, so the structure becomes 

- why you should implement primitives interface
- how you implement primitives interface
- what you can tell your users

Reviewer: Done

These implementations can be used to wrap any custom provider hardware access function
(for example: `execute_workload(QPU)` or `resource.access()`) or local simulator,
as long as the final inputs and outputs conform to the established standards set by the primitive interfaces.

> ## If your provider already implemented `backend.run`

Reviewer 3: I'm a bit confused by this section... this reads like the target audience is people who _use_ 3rd party providers, and not the providers themselves (e.g. users of `IonQProvider` and not IonQ itself).

Author: I am not too set on having this section, to be honest, that's why I mentioned in the PR description that I wanted a second opinion on this approach. I based it on the only kind of external (still mostly IBMers) provider that I know implemented primitives, that is: https://github.com/qiskit-community/qiskit-aqt-provider/tree/master. They based their primitives on the backend primitives as shown in this example, and I thought it might be a good shortcut for other providers too, but I also think it might be too hacky. If you don't think it adds any value, it could be removed.

Reviewer 3: I think we can point out backend primitives as an example, but don't explicitly say they should use it. It's also to their benefit to optimize for their hardware instead of using an out-of-box implementation.

This section would actually be quite helpful in the existing `backend.run` migration guide. If, for example, someone is using `backend.run` across Qiskit Runtime + Provider Foo and want to migrate to primitives. They can use this  as an example to write to primitives interface even if Foo hasn't migrated yet.

Reviewer 3: I found this page https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/open-source/create-a-provider#providing-an-interface-for-execution, which is a simpler version of what I had in mind. I think we just need to add more "meat" to it, like saying how the workflow is likely 
- validation, such as checking the options are valid
- pre-processing, such as applying any error suppression techniques you support, and broadcasting the inputs 
- execution to get counts
- post-processing, such as calculating the exp val and applying error mit

through subclassing; these are the [`BackendEstimatorV2`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BackendEstimatorV2) and [`BackendSamplerV2`.](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BackendSamplerV2) The inputs
to the primitives should follow the Primitive Unified Bloc (PUB) syntax specified in the V2 primitives interface. See the [Overview of PUBs section](/guides/primitive-input-output#pubs) in the Primitive inputs and outputs guide for details.

An advantage of this strategy is that the wrapper can handle the input and output manipulation, so knowledge of the PUB data
model is not required. However, this might result in a suboptimal runtime, which could be refined through a fully
custom primitives implementation.

The following snippets show how to create a custom Estimator instance following the strategy described above.
The process is analogous for a custom Sampler, modifying the base class to `BackendSamplerV2`.

``` python
from qiskit.primitives import BackendEstimatorV2

class CustomEstimator(BackendEstimatorV2):
    """Estimator primitive for custom provider."""

    # This line is for type checking purposes.
    # We are changing the type of self._backend from qiskit's

>     # BackendV1/BackendV2 classes our custom provider resource.

Author: ```suggestion
    # BackendV1/BackendV2 classes to our custom provider resource.
```

---
title: Migrate provider interfaces from backend.run to primitives
description: Migrate to the primitives interface in external providers

---

# Migrate third-party provider interfaces from `backend.run` to primitives

## Why should third-party providers implement primitives?

> The evolution of [user access patterns for QPUs](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime#why-migrate-to-qiskit-runtime-primitives?)

Reviewer 2: for anchors, we can usually ignore all punctuation/capitalization so I'll see how it does when we simply remove it.

> The evolution of [user access patterns for QPUs](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime#why-migrate-to-qiskit-runtime-primitives?)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The evolution of [user access patterns for QPUs](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime#why-migrate-to-qiskit-runtime-primitives)
```

---
title: Migrate provider interfaces from backend.run to primitives
description: Migrate to the primitives interface in external providers

---

# Migrate third-party provider interfaces from `backend.run` to primitives

## Why should third-party providers implement primitives?

The evolution of [user access patterns for QPUs](/migration-guides/qiskit-runtime#why-migrate-to-qiskit-runtime-primitives)
has led to the Qiskit primitives (`Sampler` and `Estimator`) superseding the `backend.run` interface.

After a period of overlap between `backend.run` and primitives, during which users have gradually transitioned to the 
primitives access model, the `qiskit-ibm-runtime` provider has discontinued access to IBM&reg; QPUs through `backend.run`.

This guide is for you if the following applies:

- You are in charge of a third-party provider
- Your interface is still based on `backend.run`
- You are looking for guidance to implement your own native `Sampler` and `Estimator` primitives

Once you have migrated your interface to primitives, your users with primitives-based code can seamlessly transition between providers.

> ## Exposing custom `Sampler` and `Estimator` implementations

Reviewer 3: What do you think about changing "custom implementation" to "native implementation"? _Custom_ feels like it's non-standard, but we are asking the providers to implement primitives because they are the new standard.

Custom primitive implementations can be used to wrap any service provider hardware access function
(for example, `execute_workload(QPU)` or `resource.access()`) or local simulator,
as long as the final inputs and outputs conform to the established standards set by the primitive interfaces.

Depending on the scope of your provider and what workflows you want to enable, you can choose to implement 
instances of any of the abstract base primitive interfaces: [BaseEstimatorV2](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BaseEstimatorV2) 
and [BaseSamplerV2](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BaseSamplerV2). The `Estimator` interface exposes a tool to calculate
expectation values of observables with respect to quantum states, while the `Sampler` interface outputs the counts or probability distributions
obtained from sampling from a quantum state in a QPU. The base interfaces provide methods for execution, querying job status, 
and returning the job results. See the `qiskit.primitives` [API documentation](/api/qiskit/primitives) for more information.

> Once you know which primitive to implement, review the PUB data model for input and output handling. See the following 
> guide for more details on [PUBs](/guides/primitive-input-output#pubs). To handle job status and results, 
> the Qiskit SDK provides [`DataBin`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.DataBin), 
> [`PubResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PubResult), [`PrimitiveResult`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult), 
> and [`BasePrimitiveJob`](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BasePrimitiveJob) objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Primitive Unified Bloc (PUB) data model defines the input format to the primitives, as described in [Overview of PUBs](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/guides/primitive-input-output#pubs). While different types of data can be accepted into a PUB, both `SamplerPub` and `EstimatorPub` have a `coerce()` method that can be used to convert them into the respective model. The code snippets below provide an example for each of the primitives.

The [PrimitiveResult](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult) defines the output of a primitive job. It is comprised of additional data models such as [PubResult](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PubResult) and [DataBin](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.DataBin). See [Overview of primitive results](https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/primitive-input-output#overview-of-primitive-results) for more information.
```

        }

        # iterate over pub elements
        for index, bound_circuit in enumerate(bound_circuits):
            # ACCESS PROVIDER RESOURCE HERE
            # in this case, we are showing an illustrative implementation
            samples_array = self._hw_resource.sample(bound_circuit)

            # post-processing of the sampling output to fit the required format
            for item in meas_info:
                ary = _samples_to_packed_array(samples_array, item.num_bits, item.qreg_indices)
                arrays[item.creg_name][index] = ary
        meas = {
            item.creg_name: BitArray(arrays[item.creg_name], item.num_bits) for item in meas_info
        }
        # return results wrapped in SamplerPubResult
        return SamplerPubResult(
            DataBin(**meas, shape=pub.shape),
            metadata={"shots": pub.shots, "circuit_metadata": pub.circuit.metadata},
        )
```

This implementation is based on the [`StatevectorSampler` source code](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.StatevectorSampler),
with some additions to represent the backend/hardware resource access, as the `StatevectorSampler` class is designed for local statevector simulators.

> An example of custom `Estimator` implementation for a third-party provider might look like:

Reviewer 3: I think it'd be more readable if we have separate sections for Sampler and Estimator examples.

This guide is for you if the following applies:

- You are in charge of a third-party provider
- Your interface is still based on `backend.run`
- You are looking for guidance to implement your own native `Sampler` and `Estimator` primitives

Once you have migrated your interface to primitives, your users with primitives-based code can seamlessly transition between providers.

## Exposing native `Sampler` and `Estimator` implementations

Qiskit defines base interfaces ([BaseEstimatorV2](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BaseEstimatorV2)
and [BaseSamplerV2](/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.BaseSamplerV2)) that set the standards for input and output handling 
in the primitives. Native primitive implementations can be developed to wrap any service provider hardware access function
(for example, `execute_workload(QPU)` or `resource.access()`) or local simulator,
as long as the final inputs and outputs conform to the established standards set by the base interfaces.

The `Estimator` interface exposes a tool to calculate expectation 
values of observables with respect to quantum states, while the `Sampler` outputs the counts or probability distributions 

> obtained from sampling from a quantum state in a QPU. These base interfaces also provide standard methods for execution, 

Reviewer 2: "obtained from sampling from a quantum state in a QPU" is a bit awkward - does it change the meaning to say instead, "obtained by sampling a quantum state in a QPU" or something like this? @ElePT

Author: absolutely, thanks!

> obtained from sampling from a quantum state in a QPU. These base interfaces also provide standard methods for execution, 

Author: ```suggestion
obtained by sampling a quantum state in a QPU. These base interfaces also provide standard methods for execution, 
```

querying job status, and returning the job results. See the `qiskit.primitives` [API documentation](/api/qiskit/primitives) 
for more information.

The Primitive Unified Bloc (PUB) data model defines the input format to the primitives, as described in 
[Overview of PUBs](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/guides/primitive-input-output#pubs). 
While different types of data can be accepted into a PUB, both `SamplerPub` and `EstimatorPub` have a `coerce()` 
method that can be used to convert them into the respective model. The code snippets below provide an 
example for each of the primitives.

The [PrimitiveResult](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PrimitiveResult) 
defines the output of a primitive job. It is comprised of additional data models such as 
[PubResult](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.PubResult) and 
[DataBin](https://qiskit.github.io/documentation/pr-2496/api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.DataBin). 

> See [Overview of primitive results](https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/primitive-input-output#overview-of-primitive-results) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [Overview of primitive results](/guides/primitive-input-output#overview-of-primitive-results) 
```
